 That's what I'm offering in this campaign, to build on the work, to build on the value that we share here in New York, to take those to Washington, and to knock down those barriers that in any way hold back not only individual Americans, bur our country from reaching our full potential.
 Well, the people of New York voted for me twice to be their senator from New York andandand President Obama trusted my judgment enough to ask me to be secretary of State for the United States.
When asked, he could not explain howthat would be done andwhen askedwhen asked about a number of foreign policy issues, he could not answer about Afghanistan, about Israel, about counterterrorism, except to say if he'd had some paper in front of him, maybe he could.
 President ObamaYou know, let me tell you why.
 You may not like the answer, but I'll tell you why.
So this is — this is a phony — this is a phony attack that is designed to raise questions when there is no evidence or support, to undergird the continuation that he is putting forward in these attacks.
 No bank is too big to fail, no executive too powerful to jail.
 If they fail either one, that they're a systemic risk, a grave risk to our economy, or if they fail the other, that their living wills, which is what you're referring to, is inadequate.
 I have been standing up and saying continuously we have the law.
 The big insurance companies, the hedge funds, something that I have been arguing for now a long time
  They should have to pay up through compensation or bonuses because we have to go after not just the big giant institution, we have got to go after the people who are making the decisions in the institutions.
 Well, you can tell, Dana, he cannot come up with any example, because there is no example.
 When I went to the secretary of state office, the president — President Obama led the effort to pass the Dodd-Frank bill.
 You don't just say, we're upset about this.
 I'm upset about it.
 So I support Dodd-Frank, but I have consistently said that's not enough.
 I did make it clear that their behavior would not be excused.
I'm not saying that Senator Sanders did something untoward when he voted to deregulate swaps and derivatives
And that contributed to the collapse of Lehman Brothers and started the cascade  
 If you look at it, we moved more quickly to $15 in New York City, more deliberately toward $12, $12.
 Exact same thing.
 I supported those on the front lines of the fight for — it happens to be true.
25, right? We want to raise it higher than it ever has been, but we also have to recognize some states and some cities will go higher, and I support that.
 And I think setting the goal to get to $12 is the way to go, encouraging others to get to $15.
 No, of course not.
 Of course not.
 And what I want to start by saying — it's not a laughing matter — 90 people on average a day are killed or commit suicide or die in accidents from guns, 33,000 people a year.
 I take it really seriously, because I have spent more time than I care to remember being with people who have lost their loved ones.
Then he doubled down on that in the New York Daily News interview, when asked whether he would support the Sandy Hook parents suing to try to do something to rein in the advertising of the AR-15, which is advertised to young people as being a combat weapon, killing on the battlefield.
 He said they didn't deserve their day in court.
 We hear a lot from Senator Sanders about the greed and recklessness of Wall Street, and I agree.
 Well, what about the greed and recklessness of gun manufacturers and dealers in America? 
 They come from the states that don't have kind of serious efforts to control guns that we do in New York.
And, in fact, in his own book, he talks about his 1990 campaign, and here's what he said.
Thankfully, enough people finally voted for it to keep guns out of the hands of who should not have them.
And the point that Senator Sanders keeps making about how he wouldn't want a mom and pop store — that was not the point of this.
 And if he can point to any, any incident where that happened, I would love to hear about it.
 The NRA came to their supporters in the Congress and said, stop it, stop it now, and Senator Sanders joined those who did.
 So if we were to have the balance sheet on one side, there are some positive actions and changes.
 I think that sentences got much too long.
 The original idea was not that we would increase sentences for non-violent low-level offenders, but once the federal government did what it did, states piled on.
 To tackle systemic racism and divert people in the beginning.
 I'm sorry for the consequences that were unintended and that have had a very unfortunate impact on people's lives.
I've seen the results of what has happened in families and in communities.
That's why I chose to make my very first speech a year ago on this issue, Errol, because I want to focus the attention of our country and to make the changes we need to make.
 And I also want peopleespecially I want — I want white people — I want white people to recognize that there is systemic racism.
 That's why I want a good teacher in a good school for every child, regardless of the ZIP Code that child lives in
 And that's why for the last many years, both in the Senate and as secretary of State, it's been a big part of my commitment to see what could be done.
And everyone who's looked at this independently, "The Washington Post" and others, who give us both hard times when called for on facts, have said that this is absolutely an incorrect false charge.
  And, I was surprised and disappointed when Senator Sanders attacked the agreement, said it was not enough, it didn't go far enough.
 Well, I'm a little bewildered about how to respond when you have an agreement which gives you the framework to actually take the action that would have only come about because under the Obama administration in the face of implacable hostility from the Republicans in Congress, President Obama moved forward on gas mileage, he moved forward on the clean power plant.
 It's harder to do something about the problem.
 No, well, I don't think I've changed my view on what we need to do to go from where we are, where the world is heavily dependent on coal and oil, but principally coal, to where we need to be, which is clean renewable energy, and one of the bridge fuels is natural gas.
  So I have big, bold goals, but I know in order to get from where we are, where the world is still burning way too much coal, where the world is still too intimidated by countries and providers like Russia, we have got to make a very firm but decisive move in the direction of clean energy.
I don't take a back seat to your legislation that you've introduced that you haven't been able to get passed.
 And my approach I think is going to get us there faster without tying us up into political knots with a Congress that still would not support what you are proposing.
We got rid of the chemical weapons stockpile that Qadafi had, getting it out of Libya, getting it away from militias or terrorist groups.
They, at the end, when it came to security issues, Wolf, did not want troops from any other country, not just us, European or other countries, in Libya.
And so we were caught in a very difficult position.
 They could not provide security on their own, which we could see and we told them that, but they didn't want to have others helping to provide that security.
And the result has been a clash between different parts of the country, terrorists taking up some locations in the country.
And we can't walk away from that.
Nobody stood up to Assad and removed him, and we have had a far greater disaster in Syria than we are currently dealing with right now in Libya.
 That's what a secretary of state does.
 Yes, when I was secretary of state I did urge, along with the Department of Defense and the CIA that we seek out, vet, and train, and arm Syrian opposition figures so that they could defend themselves against Assad.
The president said no.
And, yes, I do still support a no-fly zone because I think we need to put in safe havens for those poor Syrians who are fleeing both Assad and ISIS and have some place that they can be safe.
 There is a requirement that they should be doing so, and I believe that needs to be enforced.
 It has bound together across the Atlantic countries that are democracies, that have many of the same values and interests, and now we need to modernize it and move it into the 21st century to serve as that head of our defense operations in Europe when it comes to terrorism and other threats that we face.
  yes, of course they should be paying more, but that doesn't mean if they don't we leave, because I don't think that's in America's interests.
 Most of the member countries also lost soldiers and civilians in Afghanistan.
 Think of how much it would cost if Russia's aggression were not deterred because NATO was there on the front lines making it clear they could not move forward.
 I can tell you right now I have been there with Israeli officials going back more than 25 years that they do not seek this kind of attacks.
 They do not invite the rockets raining down on their towns and villages.
 And, so when it came time after they had taken the incoming rockets, taken the assaults and ambushes on their soldiers and they called and told me, I was in Cambodia, that they were getting ready to have to invade Gaza again because they couldn't find anybody to talk to tell them to stop it, I flew all night, I got there, I negotiated that.
  That does not mean — that does not mean that you don't take appropriate precautions.
 It also does not mean that we should not continue to do everything we can to try to reach a two-state solution, which would give the Palestinians the rights and
 I think I did answer it by saying that of course there have to be precautions taken but even the most independent analyst will say the way that Hamas places its weapons, the way that it often has its fighters in civilian garb, it is terrible.
I'm not saying it's anything other than terrible.
 They took out all the Israelis.
 They turned the keys over to the Palestinian people.
And what happened? Hamas took over Gaza.
 And I believe that as president I will be able to continue to make progress and get an agreement that will be fair both to the Israelis and the Palestinians without ever, ever undermining Israel's security.
 Nobody is saying that any individual leader is always right, but it is a difficult position.
If you are from whatever perspective trying to seek peace, trying to create the conditions for peace when there is a terrorist group embedded in Gaza that does not want to see you exist, that is a very difficult challenge.
 Before there was something called Obamacare, there was something called Hillarycare.
 We are pricing out middle-class, working, and poor families.
 He changed in the middle of this campaign.
 In fact, the Washington Post called it a train-wreck for the poor.
 A working woman on Medicaid who already has health insurance would be expected to pay about $2,300.
 The fine print says this, that it will — the federal government will cover two-thirds of the cost and require the states, even those led by Republican governors
 I have said repeatedly, Wolf, I am going to make the wealthy pay into Social Security to extend the Social Security Trust Fund.
 that's not accurate.
 You know, we are in vigorous agreement here, Senator.
 They're calling Social Security a Ponzi scheme.
In fact, their whole idea is to turn over the Social Security Trust Fund to Wall Street, something you and I would never let happen.
 No.
 I — as he said, I've said the same thing for years.
 that will actually agree
 I am not going to contradict the president's strategy on this.
 And I'm not going to engage in hypotheticals.
 And the Senate needs to immediately begin to respond.
  And in the meantime we have states, governors doing everything they can to restrict women's rights.
 It goes to the heart of who we are as women, our rights, our autonomy, our ability to make our own decisions, and we need to be talking about that and defending Planned Parenthood from these outrageous attacks.
 It is a campaign that will not only capture the Democratic nomination, but a campaign that will defeat whoever the Republican end up nominating.
 And my lead in pledged delegates is actually wider than Barack Obama's lead was over me.
 I'm not taking anything for granted or any voter or any place.
 I tried to have your back, and time and time again, you had mine.
I'm asking for your support again in the primary on Tuesday to continue that work together, to take what we did in New York and to take those New York values to the White House, and put them to work on behalf of all of our people, to knock down the barriers that stand in the way.
 But we also have racial barriers, gender barriers, homophobic barriers, disability barriers.
 And together, we won't just make promises we can't keep.
When it comes to the water itself, we are supporting a program that Mayor Waver announced through Flint Waterworks to pay people in Flint, not outsiders, but people here to deliver the water while we are fixing the pipes.
 Well, I think that the people here in the region, who knew about this and failed to follow what you just said, rightly, the law required, have been eliminated from the EPA.
 I don't — well, I don't know how high it goes.
 I was told that — you know, some of the higher-ups were pushing to get changes that were not happening.
 And yes, people should be fired.
 This is not the only place where this kind of action is needed.
 So I'm not satisfied with just doing everything we must do for Flint.
 I want to tackle this problem across the board.
 And if people know about it and they're not acting, and they're in the government at any level, they should be forced to resign.
 Well, I agree completely.
 That's why 500,000 children today have lead — lead in their bodies.
 We will commit to a priority to change the water systems, and we will commit within five years to remove lead from everywhere.
 I worked with then Senator Obama to get more money, more support to do more to remove lead.
 That has, unfortunately, been in many ways, moved to a lower priority.
 If it leads to resignation, or recall if you're in political office.
If it leads to civil penalties, if it leads to criminal responsibility.
And, this problem is one that is particularly outrageous and painful at the same time.
 We have this problem in other places, but we don't say that it was actually caused by decisions made by public officials in positions of authority, as this one was.
Then, when I talked to the mayor I basically said, "What can I do to help?"Then, when I came here, and I met with some of the mothers, and met their children, and heard their stories — I'm just determined to do whatever I can.
 I'm going to do what I think will work which is both carrots and sticks.
We're also going to invest more on infrastructure as we both have said, "it's woefully under resourced.
 I want to do more to help small businesses, they are the source of two thirds of our jobs and we have to help them start and grow, particularly minority and women-owned small businesses.
 They will have to pay them back if they are leaving a place that actually invested in them.
 They are going to have to pay an exit fee.
to set the record straight, I voted against the only multinational trade agreement that came before me when I was in the Senate.
 I came out against the TPP after it was finished.
 Now let me get back to what happened in January of 2009.
 Were there things in it that I didn't like? Would I have done it differently? Absolutely.
 So when I talk about Senator Sanders being a one-issue candidate, I mean very clearly — you have to make hard choices when you're in positions of responsibility.
 The two senators from Michigan stood on the floor and said, "we have to get this money released.
 You did not.
 If everybody had voted the way he did, I believe the auto industry would have collapsed, taking four million jobs with it.
 I told them they were wrecking the economy.
 I also called for closing loopholes including the carried interest loophole.
 I also called for changes in CEO pay.
 And you know what, if you were going to be in some way distrusted or dismissed about whether you can take on Wall Street if you ever took money, President Obama took more money from Wall Street in the 2008 campaign than anybody ever had.
 I have said repeatedly no bank is too big to fail, no executive too powerful to jail.
 And I have said that I would use the tools in the Dodd-Frank regulations, that if any bank posed a systemic risk to the economy, they would be broken up.
 Because there does need to be accountability, including criminal accountability if it is called for.
 You know, if we're going to argue about the 1990's instead of talking about the future, which I'd much prefer because I think every election is about the future, and you all deserve to know what we will do to help you have a brighter future — but, if we are going to talk about the 1990's I think it's only fair to say that at the end of the 1990's, after two terms of my husband's presidency, the unemployment rate in Michigan was 4.
I favor that, he's opposed it.
 I know, if we are going to compete and win in the global economy, we can't let every other country support their companies and we take a hands off approach.
 I will not agree with that.
 I will tell you what, Anderson, after I investigated it, I concluded they did and here's why.
 We don't have as quite an aggressive outreach from our government.
 That to me was an unacceptable concession.
 We are lacking 10 percent.
 You know, on average, 90 people a day are killed by gun violence in our country.
 So we do have to continue to try to work on that because not every killer will have the same profile.
 And then they found out later, he shouldn't have gotten the gun when he killed nine people at Mother Emmanuel Church.
I also believe, so strongly Gene, that giving immunity to gunmakers and sellers was a terrible mistake.
 Because it removed any accountability from the makers and the sellers.
 And it also disrupted what was a very promising legal theory, to try to get makers to do more to make guns safer for example.
 To try to give sellers more accountability for selling guns when they shouldn't have.
 So that is an issue that Senator Sanders and I differ on, I voted against giving them immunity, but I think we should very seriously move to repeal that and go back to making sure gun makers and sellers are like any other business.
 Well, that — that is not — that is not what happened, and I think it's important for people to understand.
Because of the proliferation of guns, because of the epidemic of gun violence in our country, there were a group of cities, states, and other concerned people who, in the late 90s and in the early 2000s, were working on legal theories that they thought would force gun makers to do more to make guns safer and force sellers to be much more responsible.
The NRA saw this happening, and they said, "we've got to stop it.
 Last thing in the world we want is to have guns that you can only shoot with your fingerprint, or to have guns with such strong safety locks on them that they may not be sellable.
 and they basically went to the Congress — I was there.
 And they said, "give us absolute immunity.
 I want people in this audience to think about what it must feel like to send off your first grader, little backpack, maybe, on his or her back, and then the next thing you hear is that somebody has come to that school using an automatic weapon, an AR-15, and murdered those children.
 you talk about corporate greed?
 Well, Don't, let me say this, Senator Sanders voted for that bill, we both supported it.
 And, one of those problems was, unfortunately, a move to expand the reasons why people would be incarcerated, not just at the federal level which is what this bill about, but in states and localities as well.
 And, that's why the very first speech that I gave in this campaign was about criminal justice reform, and ending the era of mass incarceration because I believe absolutely that too many families were broken up, too many communities were adversely affected.
 That means body cameras, that means ending profiling, that means doing everything we can to make sure there's respect between the community and the police.
 Are you going to ask him the same question?
 I just said that.
 That's why I'm focused, and have a very comprehensive approach toward fixing the criminal justice system, going after systemic racism that stalks the criminal justice system, ending private prisons, ending the incarceration of low-level offenders, and I am committed to doing that.
I think the most important that happened to me was a combination of my church and youth minister when I was a teenager, insisting that we go in to inner-city Chicago because I lived in a suburb and have exchanges with kids in black and hispanic churches.
 I asked her for a job and she said she didn't have any money.
 I was working my way through law school and she said if I could get a job and get myself paid, she would give me a job.
 Well, Don, if I could, I think being a white person in the United States of America, I know that I have never had the experience that so many people, the people in this audience have had.
 And I think it's incumbent upon me and what I have been trying to talk about during this campaign is to urge white people to think about what it is like to have "the talk" with your kids, scared that your sons or daughters, even, could get in trouble for no good reason whatsoever like Sandra Bland and end up dead in a jail in Texas.
 And I have spent a lot of time with the mothers of African-American children who have lost them, Trayvon Martin's mother.
That is what I will try to do to deal with what I know is the racism that still stalks our country.
 Well, I was speaking about drug cartels and criminal activity that was very concerning to folks across the country.
 I think it was a poor choice of words, I never used it before, I haven't used it since, I would not use it again.
Because my whole life, to go back to what I was saying to Mr.
 It's unfortunately across America.
 And here is Flint, we've got to do more to mitigate against the effects of lead, because too many kids are having the experiences I've been told about, where they're falling back in school, where they are having headaches because of the lead exposure.
 No, it was the crime bill.
 That bill had a lot of provisions that unfortunately were stripped out by George W.
 And I disagreed with the way it was applied.
 Number one, I would reinstate a program we did have during the 1990's where the federal government provided funding to repair and modernize public schools because a lot of communities can't afford to do that on their own.
 Secondly, I would use every legal means at my disposal to try to force the Governor and the state to return the schools to the people of Detroit — to end the emergency management.
which, I believe, if you look at the data, the situation has only gotten worse with these emergency managers that have put the system further in debt.
 And we've really candid conversations because we are going to have to take a look at — what do we need in the 21st century to really involve families, to help kids who have more problems than just academic problems?A lot of what has happened and honestly it really pains me, a lot of people have blaming and scape-goating teachers because they don't want to put the money into the schools system that deserve the support that comes from the government doing it's job.
 Here's what I'd do - the congress finally got around to pass the Highway Transportation Bill, which should never have been partisan - it turned into be one partisan argument.
 We have pipelines that are leaking and that are dangerous.
 You know, I don't support it when any locality or any state is against it, number one.
 I don't support it when the release of methane or contamination of water is present.
 I don't support it — number three — unless we can require that anybody who fracks has to tell us exactly what chemicals they are using.
So by the time we get through all of my conditions, I do not think there will be many places in America where fracking will continue to take place.
 And I think that's the best approach, because right now, there places where fracking is going on that are not sufficiently regulated.
 I've already said we are taking away the subsidies for oil and gas, but it is important that people understand that a president can't go ordering folks around.
 Our system doesn't permit that.
 I have more than 850,000 donors, most of them give less than $100.
 And we get into vigorous debate about issues, but compare the substance of this debate with what you saw on the Republican stage last week.
 And if we can't get it done through the court, I will lead a constitutional amendment effort to reverse it that way.
 I have said, and I'll repeat here, I think that Donald Trump's bigotry, his bullying, his bluster, are not going to wear well on the American people.
 We have to knock down the barriers, we have to end the divisiveness, we have to unify the country.
 People who either have gone through or are experiencing difficult times, illness, divorce, death, disappointment, all of the life experiences that confront most of us.
 And I do want to take on the barriers of systemic racism.
 I may not have experienced them, but I see the results every single day.
 I know a lot of Americans are angry about the economy.
 There aren't enough good-paying jobs, especially for young people.
 And yes, the economy is rigged in favor of those at the top.
 We both agree that we have to get unaccountable money out of our political system and that we have to do much more to ensure that Wall Street never wrecks main street again.
 I want to tackle those barriers that stand in the way of too many Americans right now.
 African-Americans who face discrimination in the job market, education, housing, and the criminal justice system.
 Last week in a CNN town hall, the Senator told a questioner that the questioner would spend about $500 dollars in taxes to get about $5,000 dollars in healthcare.
 Every progressive economist who has analyzed that says that the numbers don't add up, and that's a promise that cannot be kept, and it's really important now that we are getting into the rest of the country that both of us are held to account for explaining what we are proposing because, especially with healthcare, this is not about math.
 You know, before it was called Obamacare, it was called Hillarycare.
 And I took on the drug companies and I took on the insurance companies to try to get us universal health care coverage.
 And it is difficult to in any way argue with the goal that we both share.
 So if you're having Medicare for all, single-payer, you need to level with people about what they will have at the end of the process you are proposing.
 And based on every analysis that I can find by people who are sympathetic to the goal, the numbers don't add up, and many people will actually be worse off than they are right now.
 And we are not England.
 I far prefer that and the chances we have to be successful there than trying to start all over again, gridlocking our system, and trying to get from zero to 100 percent.
 It comes from the right, from the left, from people on all sides of the political spectrum.
So we have a special obligation to make clear what we stand for, which is why I think we should not make promises we can't keep, because that will further, I think, alienate Americans from understanding and believing we can together make some real changes in people's lives.
 And again, paid for.
 And what I have said is I will not throw us further into debt.
 One of them being that if you don't have some agreement within the system from states and from families and from students, it's hard to get to where we need to go.
 And when it comes to the issues that are really on the front lines as to whether we're going to have equal pay, paid family leave, some opportunity for, you know, women to go as far as their hard work and talent take them, I think that we still have some barriers to knock down, which is why that's at the core of my campaign.
 You know, I have said — I have said many times, you know, I'm not asking people to support me because I'm a woman.
 I have gone time and time again to take on the vested interests who would keep women's health care decisions the province of the government instead of women ourselves.
 Somebody who, yes, votes right, but much more than that, leads the efforts to protect the hard-fought gains that women have made, that, make no mistake about it, are under tremendous attack, not just by the Republican presidential candidates but by a whole national effort to try to set back women's rights.
 You know, I completely agree with Senator Sanders.
 The first speech I gave in this campaign back in April was about criminal justice reform and ending the era of mass incarceration.
 The statistics from Wisconsin are particularly troubling, because it is the highest rate of incarceration for African-Americans in our nation, twice the national average.
 And we know of the tragic, terrible event that lead to the death of Dontre Hamilton right here in Milwaukee, a young man unarmed, who should still be with us.
 And, then we have to go after sentencing, and that's one of the problems here in Wisconsin because so much of what happened in the criminal justice system doesn't happen at the federal level, it happens at the state and local level.
 There are other racial discrepancies.
 Really systemic racism in this state, as in others, education, in employment, in the kinds of factors that too often lead from a position where young people, particularly young men, are pushed out of school early, are denied employment opportunities.
 Well, I'm just not sure I agree completely with that assessment.
 So, we are seeing the dark side of the remaining systemic racism that we have to root out in our society.
 We now have much more information about what must be done to fix our criminal justice system.
 I think what President Obama did was to exemplify the importance of this issue as our first African American president, and to address it both from the President's office, and through his advocacy, such as working with young men, and Mrs.
 Nobody can deny them.
 To use the Justice Department, as we just saw, they have said they are going to sue Ferguson, that entered into a consent agreement, and then tried to back out.
 So, we're going to enforce the law, we're going to change policing practices, we're going to change incarceration practices, but we're also going to emphasize education, jobs, and housing.
 People with a high school education or less are not even living as long as their parents lived.
 So, yes, I do think it would be a terrible oversight not to try to address the very real problems that white Americans — particularly those without a lot of education whose jobs have — you know, no longer provided them or even no longer present in their communities, because we have to focus where the real hurt is.
 I strongly support the president's executive actions.
 I'm against the kind of inhumane treatment that is now being visited upon families, waking them up in the middle of the night, rounding them up.
 Hopefully after the 2016 election, some of the Republicans will come to their senses and realize we are not going to deport 11 or 12 million people in this country.
 One, with respect to the Central American children, I made it very clear that those children needed to be processed appropriately, but we also had to send a message to families and communities in Central America not to send their children on this dangerous journey in the hands of smugglers.
 Well, that just wasn't — that just wasn't the fact, Senator.
 The fact is that there was a great effort made by the Obama administration and others to really send a clear message, because we knew that so many of these children were being abused, being treated terribly while they tried to get to our border.
 I've said I'm looking at a couple of different ways, one which you mentioned, Senator, but also trying to expand the existing tax to passive income that wealthy people have so that we do get more revenue into the Social Security Trust Fund.
 When the Social Security program was started in the 1930s, not very many women worked.
 They do not get any credit for their care-taking responsibilities.
 And the people who are often the most hard-hit are widows, because when their spouse dies, they can lose up to one-half of their Social Security monthly payment.
 Well, Senator, look, I think we're in vigorous agreement here.
 That has not been.
 I think that sets us apart from a lot of what's happening right now on the Republican side.
 It's not my PAC.
 If you take donations from Wall Street, you can't be independent.
 Well, let's just — let's just follow up on this, because, you know, I've made it very clear that no bank is too big to fail, no executive too powerful to jail, and because of Dodd-Frank, we now have in law a process that the president, the Federal Reserve, and others can use if any bank poses a systemic risk.
 I agree, however, it doesn't go far enough, because what it focuses on are the big banks, which Senator Sanders has talked about a lot, for good reason.
 And, you know, there are a number of programs that I think are duplicative and redundant and not producing the results that people deserve.
 We have made a lot of improvements in our domestic security since 9/11, and we have been able to foil and prevent attacks, yet we see the terrible attack in San Bernardino and know that we haven't done enough.
 We have to go after terrorist networks, predominantly ISIS — that's not the only one, but let's focus on that for a minute.
 We have to lead a coalition that will take back territory from ISIS.
 And we have to take on ISIS online.
 You know, after 9/11, one of the efforts that we did in New York was if you see something or hear something suspicious, report it.
stirs up the demagoguery against American Muslims, that hurts us at home.
 It's not only offensive; it's dangerous.
 I put together the coalition that imposed the sanctions on Iran that got us to the negotiating table to put a lid on their nuclear weapons program.
  And you don't go tell Muslim nations you want them to be part of a coalition when you have a leading candidate for president of the United States who insults their religion.
 When people go to vote in primaries or caucuses, they are voting not only for the president, they are voting for the commander-in-chief.
 And yet when he won, he turned to me, trusting my judgment, my experience, to become secretary of state.
 And, look, I think it's important to look at what the most important counterterrorism judgment of the first four years of the Obama administration was, and that was the very difficult decision as to whether or not to advise the president to go after bin Laden.
 I looked at the evidence.
 Not all of his top national security advisors agreed with that.
  So if we want to pick and choose — and I certainly do — people I listen to, people I don't listen to, people I listen to for certain areas, then I think we have to be fair and look at the entire world, because it's a big, complicated world out there.
 The agreement on a cease-fire, though, is something that has to be implemented more quickly than the schedule that the Russians agreed to.
 Are they buying time to continue their bombardment on behalf of the Assad regime to further decimate what's left of the opposition, which would be a grave disservice to any kind of eventual cease-fire? So I know Secretary Kerry is working extremely hard to try to move that cease-fire up as quickly as possible.
 At the core of that resolution is an agreement I negotiated in June of 2012 in Geneva, which set forth a cease-fire and moving toward a political resolution, trying to bring the parties at stake in Syria together.
 This is incredibly complicated, because we've got Iran as a big player, in addition to Russia.
 This is one of the areas I've disagreed with Senator Sanders on, who has called for Iranian troops trying to end civil war in Syria, which I think would be a grave mistake.
 Trying to get Iran and Saudi Arabia to work together, as he has suggested in the past, is equally a nonstarter.
 And remember, the Russians have not gone after ISIS or any of the other terrorist groups.
 That has to be enforced absolutely with consequences for Iran at the slightest deviation from their requirements under the agreement.
 I do not think we should promise or even look toward normalizing relations because we have a lot of other business to get done with Iran.
 Yes, they have to stop being the main state sponsor of terrorism.
 Yes, they have to stop trying to destabilize the Middle East, causing even more chaos.
 They've got to quit sponsoring Hezbollah and Hamas.
 Senator Sanders, from a debate in 2008, quote what I said.
 The question was, would you meet with an adversary without conditions? I said no.
 And in fact, in Obama administration, we did not meet with anybody without conditions.
 And we should back up the recent donors conference to make sure we have made our contribution to try to deal with the enormous cost that these refugees are posing to Turkey and to members of the E.
This is a humanitarian catastrophe.
 There is no other description of it.
 I certainly agree with FDR for all the reasons Senator Sanders said.
 And I agree about the role that he played both in war and in peace on the economy and defeating fascism around the world.
 And this is not the first time that he has criticized President Obama.
 In the past he has called him weak.
 He has called him a disappointment.
 He wrote a forward for a book that basically argued voters should have buyers' remorse when it comes to President Obama's leadership and legacy.
 And I just couldn't agree — disagree more with those kinds of comments.
 You know, Senator, what I am concerned about, is not disagreement on issues, saying that this is what I would rather do, I don't agree with the president on that, calling the president weak, calling him a disappointment, calling several times that he should have a primary opponent when he ran for re-election in 2012, you know, I think that goes further than saying we have our disagreements.
 You know, we — we agree that we've got to get unaccountable money out of politics.
 I am not a single-issue candidate, and I do not believe we live in a single-issue country.
 I think that a lot of what we have to overcome to break down the barriers that are holding people back, whether it's poison in the water of the children of Flint, or whether it's the poor miners who are being left out and left behind in coal country, or whether it is any other American today who feels somehow put down and oppressed by racism, by sexism, by discrimination against the LGBT community, against the kind of efforts that need to be made to root out all of these barriers, that's what I want to take on.
the American middle class, and who are being attacked by ideologues, by demagogues.
 But if we were to stop that tomorrow, we would still have the indifference, the negligence that we saw in Flint.
 We would still have racism holding people back.
 We would still have sexism preventing women from getting equal pay.
 We would still have LGBT people who get married on Saturday and get fired on Monday.
 And we would still have governors like Scott Walker and others trying to rip out the heart of the middle class by making it impossible to organize and stand up for better wages and working conditions.
 So I'm going to keep talking about tearing down all the barriers that stand in the way of Americans fulfilling their potential, because I don't think our country can live up to its potential unless we give a chance to every single American to live up to theirs.
